
JACKHACK GUIDE
==============

BASIC GAMEPLAY

For 99 days (turns) you will be in a place with a terrain type and
possibly a monster or town.  The chance of there being a town starts
at 99% on day one and drops to 1% by day 99;  likewise, the chance
of there being a monster starts at 1% and works its way up to 99%.
Each day, you will be asked to select a job to play that day;  what happens
when you select that job depends (mostly) upon whether there's a 
monster or a town (or neither.)  If you are in a town, depending on
the job you choose, you may then be prompted with an offer to purchase
something (if you have enough gold to buy what's for sale) which you
may accept or refuse.  Those are the only two types of choices you will
be asked to make.  Your final score is your gold, so spend it well.

On day 100, you will automatically play the job you have played most 
often.  Generally, it will play like a level 100 monster with the most
common elemental strength and the second most common elemental weakness, 
in a town with 100 gold on the rarest terrain, though certain rules and 
exceptions apply, depeding on the job.

QUICK START

The most important thing to know is that you can type a question mark
rather than a number at the job selection prompt to get a basic overview
of what each job can accomplish that day.  Use this to get an idea of what 
your basic options are.

Playing Thief is the only way you can extract a significant amount of gold from 
a town without a monster.  As towns without monsters dominate the early game, you'll 
want to play Thief in towns until you have enough gold to do something else.

As soon as you build up some gold to spend, you'll want to play Scholar in a few
towns to train yourself up in other jobs quickly.  This costs twice your Scholar
level in gold.  It's also good to play Druid in town early on, to purchase a pet
for the day number in gold.  Pets offer a benefit for most jobs.

To improve your chance of success against monsters, you'll need health.  You can
play Healer to trade in gold for health, or play Ranger against a monster to gain
health directly.

If your health drops below 1, you'll retreat from battle and have your health reset 
to 1 on the next day.  If this happens when you're playing Thief, you'll also lose 
all your gold.

When facing a monster, playing Thief, Scholar or Warrior risks losing up to the day 
number in health.  Playing Wizard or Ranger risks losing all your health, but at
higher job levels is more likely to end the battle quickly without losing any health.  
Druids, Healers and Artists never lose health.

Wizards need at least 2 health to win a battle, and Druids need more health 
than the monster you are facing to capture it.  All other jobs that engage in 
battle always have at least a remote chance of succeeding in a fight.

The title after your character's name (eg "Jack the Thief/Scholar") is used to 
determine what job you will automatically play against the final boss on day 100.  
It is also used for the high score board--only the highest score for each job title
is recorded.  However, your title does not matter before the last day.  Only the
job you choose to play on a given day matters for that day.

Finally, know that Artists are almost entirely useless, and tend to end up very poor.
You've been warned.

TOWNS

Towns have town gold, which will be a random number no greater than the day number.
They also have a variety of shops that appear under different circumstances, depending
on the job that the shops serve.  They also offer many opportunities for healing.

ELEMENTS

There are 14 elements in the game, each corresponding to a terrain.
The least common terrain (parking lot) occurs about once every 105 days;  
the most common terrain (prairie) occurs about 14 out of 105 days.

MONSTERS

There are 14 monster types in the game, distributed with increasing rarity
in the same manner as the elements.  Individual monsters have their own level, 
unrelated to their type, which will be a random number no greater than the day 
number on which they appear (a monster on day 25 will be no higher than level 25, 
but is probably lower than that.)  Monster levels are used to determine success
in battle.  The monster's level is also its initial health, attack damage and
the amount of gold that can be plundered from it.

Monsters are generally weak against one element and strong against another.
Monster strengths and weaknesses occur with inverse rarity to terrains (the 
most common strength or weakness, concrete, corresponds to the rarest terrain.)
If a monster is generated with identical weakness and strength, it will
have neither a weakness nor a strength.  Monster levels are effectively halved
for attack rolls on their weak terrain, and doubled for attack rolls on their
strong terrain (health, attack damage and gold are not affected.)

Monsters may be studied by certain jobs.  Once a monster type is "Known", you
will see the stats for every monster of that type.

PETS

Pets are monsters that you befriend, and fight on your behalf.  Pets are
acquired using the Druid job, but most jobs receive some kind of bonus for 
having a pet.  If you have no pets, you may purchase one in a town using
Druid for a cost equal to the day number in gold.

JOBS

Each job starts at level 1.  Every time you play a job, you will go up one
level in that job.  You can also train in jobs using Scholar, such that 
job levels can increase faster than the day number.

Some jobs can also have their own elemental strengths and weaknesses.  
Certain jobs also have elemental attacks (not to be confused with strengths) 
that double their level when facing opponents weak in that element.  Elemental
strengths, weaknesses and attacks apply only to the job that earned them,
and do not affect your other jobs.

Your top job (the one listed first after your name) is the job you have played
most often (the number in parenthesis after the job level), and is the job you will 
automatically play on Day 100.  In case of a tie, the first job to become your top 
job will keep the title (you have to exceed your current top job to change your top job.)

More than one job may be listed after your name.  If you've played your top job
1/2 the time or more, all jobs played 1/3 the time or more will be listed;
if you've played your top job 1/3 the time or more, all jobs played 1/4 the time
or more will be listed, and so forth.  If you've played all 8 jobs more than 1/9
the time, you're a "Jack of All Trades" and special finale circumstances apply.  
Your top job is always listed first, and the remaining jobs are listed in descending
order of the number of times they've been played, with ties broken by which was 
played first.

Your full title (all jobs in order or "of All Trades") is what's used for 
ranking you on the high score list--only one high score for each title will be listed.

DICE ROLLS

You won't actually see the numbers being rolled while playing the game, but 
understanding them will help you understand why your actions succeed or fail.  
There are two types of rolls in the game--attack rolls and skill rolls.

Skill rolls are a number between one and the day number, which must be
less than or equal to the corresponding job level to succeed.  Skill rolls
automatically succeed if the job is strong on the day's terrain, and automatically
fail if the job is weak on the day's terrain.  Unless the job is weak on the
terrain, skill rolls for a level equal to or greater than the day number will 
always succeed.

Attack rolls are more complicated, but still pretty simple.  Attacks occur
between a job/pet and a monster (any of which can be attacker or defender,
depending on the circumstances.)  The basic attack roll is a number between 
one and the sum of both their levels.  It succeeds if it is less than or equal
to the attacker's level.  For example, a level 25 vampire making an attack against
a level 50 Warrior needs to roll 25 or less on a 75-sided die.  Thus,
unlike skill rolls, no matter how high the level, there's always a chance the
attack roll will fail.

For attack rolls, if a participant is strong on the terrain on which it
occurs, their level is doubled.  If a participant is weak on the terrain, 
their level is halved (though it is always at least 1.)  Also, if the attacker 
has an elemental attack (not the same as a strength) and the defender is weak 
in that element, the attacker's level is doubled.

WARRIOR

Warriors always receive +1 health from a town.

Warriors may also purchase elemental attacks (in the form of "gems")
from towns where there are no monsters.  The first gem they buy costs 1 gold, 
the second costs 2 gold, the third costs 3, etc.  The gem for sale always 
corresponds to the terrain (for instance, towns on the prairie always sell 
grass gems.)  If you already have that gem or you can't afford it, no gem will 
be offered.  Since monster weaknesses have the opposite distribution as
terrain types, gems from the rarest terrains are more likely to be useful.

Warriors fight monsters one hitpoint at a time.  Warrior attacks always
succeed, so the battle always begins by the warrior inflicting 1 damage on
the monster.  Then the monster makes an attack roll against the warrior and, 
if it succeeds, you lose 1 health.  If you run out of health before
the monster dies, you retreat and your health is reset back to 1 (2 in a town,
counting the +1 health mentioned above.)  Note that, because Warrior attacks
always succeed, you'll never lose more than the monster's level in health.

If a Warrior has pets, the highest level pet for the circumstances (including
elemental strengths/weaknesses) will also get to make one attack roll against the 
monster, before the fight begins.  Pets inflict their level in damage when their 
roll succeeds, so pets have the potential of ending the fight very quickly.  
Pets are very good to have with Warriors.

If a Warrior defeats a monster, it plunders the monster's gold.  If a Warrior 
defeats a monster in a town, it also receives the town's gold.

On day 100, Warriors play out exactly like they would in a 100 level town with
a 100 level monster, except their pets cannot help.  The final monster is always
weak against the quantum gem.

HEALER

Healers never get any gold and they ignore monsters completely.

Healers make a skill roll and, if it succeeds, you regain their level in health and 
lose a corresponding amount of gold.  If you do not have enough gold, you will only 
heal up to the gold you have.  If you do not have any gold but you do have pets, 
you will sacrifice your richest pet and use its gold, possibly netting more than 
your level in health.  If you have no gold or pets, you will get a free +1 health.

If the roll succeeds and you offered some sort of sacrifice, your Healer will become
strong on that day's terrain (represented on your character sheet by a corresponding
god.)  All of your skill rolls on this terrain will now automatically succeed.
You do not gain this elemental strength for free heals.

If the roll fails in a town and you have gold to sacrifice, you will still get to
heal for the usual cost, but you will not gain the elemental strength.  You cannot
sacrifice a pet in this circumstance.

Otherwise, if the roll fails, you get a freebie +1 health.

On day 100, Healers make a skill roll.  If it succeeds, they receive 200 gold
plus whatever they've sacrificed (to make up for generally not being able to get
gold.)  The final terrain is always the rarest terrain, parking lot, so it helps to
already have the corresponding god, Bob.

THIEF

When facing monsters, the monster makes a single attack roll against the Thief.  If it
succeeds, you lose the monster's level in health.  If this knocks you out, the monster
will steal ALL YOUR GOLD.  If you survive the monster's attack, the Thief then makes 
a single attack roll against the monster.  If it succeeds, you steal the monster's gold.

If you have a pet, the monster will attack the pet instead, possibly killing it.

In towns, Thiefs make a skill check.  If it succeeds, they steal the town's gold.
If it fails, they become wanted by the local guild, making them weak on that terrain, 
represented on your character sheet by the "Wanted" field.  Until you clear your name,
you will be unable to steal from towns on that terrain, and you will be weak against
monsters on that terrain.  Next time you play Thief in a town on that terrain, if you
have enough gold, you can pay off a corrupt official with the day number in gold
to clear your name for this terrain.

If you successfully steal from a town, if you have enough gold and have not already
done so, you will be given the option to pay twice the day number in gold to join the 
local guild for that terrain, in which case you will always steal from towns on that 
terrain, and you will be strong against monsters on that terrain.

On day 100, Thiefs play out exactly like they would in a 100 level town with
a 100 level monster, except their pets cannot help.  The final terrain is always
parking lot, so it helps to belong to the Guild of Slackers.

WIZARD

Wizards always receive +1 health from a town.

Wizards may also purchase elemental attacks (in the form of "spells")
from towns that don't have monsters.  The first spell they buy costs 1 gold, 
the second costs 2 gold, the third costs 3, etc.  The spell for sale always 
corresponds to the terrain (for instance, towns on the prairie always sell
the mow spell.)  If you already have that spell or you can't afford it, no spell 
will be offered.  Since monster weaknesses have the opposite distribution as
terrain types, spells from the rarest terrains are more likely to be useful.

Wizards only need to land one attack when fighting monsters, but they don't
have initiative, so the battle begins with the monster making an attack
roll.  If it succeeds, the monster does its level in damage.  If this drops
your health below 2, you retreat.  Otheerwise, you "tap yourself for mana"
(-1 Health) and make an attack roll.  If it succeeds, the battle is over and you 
win.  If it fails, the whole process repeats.  Note that, because Wizards must tap 
themselves for mana, they must have at least 2 health to fight at all.

If you have a pet and it makes a successful attack roll against a monster at
the start of battle, your Wizard gets the initiative and the monster loses its
first attack (the pet does not, however, inflict any damage on the monster.)
Play proceeds back and forth as usual from there.  A pet is a very good thing 
for a Wizard to have.

If a Wizard defeats a monster, it plunders the monster's gold.  If a Wizard 
defeats a monster in a town, it also receives the town's gold.

On day 100, Wizards play out exactly like they would in a 100 level town with
a 100 level monster, except their pets cannot help.  The final monster is always
weak against the warp spell.

RANGER

Rangers always receive +1 health from a town.  Rangers can also choose to stay
at an inn by paying twice the day number in gold, receiving the day number in
additional health (twice as expensive per point as a Healer.)

Rangers fight exactly like Wizards, but they do not need to tap themselves for
mana (hence they can fight with just 1 health.)  If they win, instead of receiving
monster gold, they receive an equivalent amount of health.  They still receive
gold from the town, if they succeed in killing a monster there.  Also like
Wizards, they can gain initiative by having a pet.

If there is neither a town nor a monster on a given day, Rangers receive +1 health.
They also become strong on the day's terrain, noted as a map on your character sheet.
If they already have that map and you have pets of an unidentified monster type, 
they will identify a pet and you will be able to see the stats for all monsters
and pets of that type.  This is the same thing Scholars do when they identify a
monster;  there is no need to identify the same monster type with both classes.

On day 100, Rangers play out exactly like they would in a 100 level town with
a 100 level monster, except their pets cannot help.  The final terrain is always
parking lot, so it helps to have that map.

If they succeed against the final monster AND their final health (including the +100
from the monster) is greater than their gold, their health becomes their gold (ie
you gain health minus gold in gold.)  Whether or not your final health exceeds your
gold, you'll also receive 100 gold from the town for killing the monster.  This means
that it's to your benefit to convert as much gold into health as you can before you
get to that final battle.  Hence, Healers are very useful alongside Rangers.

SCHOLAR

Scholars exist primarily for training other classes and identifying monsters.

If a monster is present, the monster will make a single attack roll against the
Scholar.  If it succeeds, you lose the monster's level in health (but no more than
would reduce you to 1 health.)  Whether or not the monster hits you, you will 
identify the monster and you will be able to see the stats for all monsters and 
pets of that type from now on.

If you have a pet, the monster will attack the pet instead, possibly killing it.

The only time you will not identify the monster is if its attack succeeds and you 
only had 1 health to begin with, in which case you will also lose all the other 
benefits listed below.

In towns, unless you are keeping your distance from a monster, the Scholar will 
have the opportunity to train up another job.  The cost is always 2 times your 
Scholar level, and yields an equivalent amount of levels for the (randomly 
selected) job that is offered.  The Scholar job itself cannot be trained up, so 
your Scholar level is always 1 + the number of times you've played Scholar.  
Also note that training as an Artist offers absolutely no gameplay benefit, as 
Artists make no rolls (you've been warned.)  If you cannot afford to train,
you will receive +1 gold instead.

If there is not a town, unless you are keeping your distance from a monster,
the scholar makes a skill check.  If it succeeds, you will receive an "unidentified 
scroll" worth 2 times your Scholar level in some unknown class.  Next time you play 
Scholar in a town (without keeping distant), all scrolls will be identified and you 
will train their value in the jobs listed on them.

Scholars have no elemental strengths, weaknesses or attacks.

Day 100 begins with a 100 level monster making a single attack roll against you,
doing 100 damage if it hits and POSSIBLY KILLING YOU AND STEALING ALL YOUR GOLD.  
If you survive, you will identify all remaining scrolls.  Your reward is the 200 
gold from the town and monster, plus 1 gold for each level you trained in all 
classes (this includes training from scrolls.)

DRUID

Druids are all about collecting pets.  When encountering a monster, if your
health is greater than the monster's level, you will make an attack roll.  If 
it succeeds, the monster becomes your pet.  If it fails and you already have pets, 
the monster then makes an attack roll against the highest level pet for the 
circumstances (including elemental strengths and weaknesses), doing the monster's 
level in damage if it succeeds and possibly killing the pet.  If you have no pets, 
the monster attacks you instead.  Play continues in this manner until you capture 
the monster or your health is less than or equal to the monster's level.

Druids have no elemental strengths, weaknesses or attacks, but their pets' strengths
and weaknesses apply when the pet is being attacked.

In towns, if you already have pets, the town zookeeper will offer to buy your 
richest pet for the pet's gold plus the town's gold.  If you have no pets,
the zookeeper will offer to sell you a pet for the day number in gold, though it
should be noted that the pet's level will never exceed the day number and will
probably be lower.  Buying even a weak pet early on (say, for 3 gold on day 3) can
be very helpful for other jobs, even if you aren't primarily playing a Druid.

On Day 100, first you will attempt to make the final boss your pet using the
attack sequence described above.  Because the final boss is always a 100 level
monster, you must have at least 101 health to do this.

If you have any pets after this, you will sell off your menagerie for 
100 gold (the final town gold) plus all your pets' gold.

ARTIST

Artists gain no health or gold and engage in no attacks.  If you play an artist, 
they will paint a picture of the terrain (unless they already have, in which case 
they will do nothing.)  If a monster is present, they will also paint a picture of 
the monster (likewise, unless they've painted that monster type already.)  There 
are 28 possible pictures to be painted.

Paying to train as an Artist is a waste of gold, because the Artist level affects nothing.

If you happend to reach Day 100 as an Artist, you will receive 1 gold for your first
painting, 2 for your second, etc, up to 406 gold.  You will also receive the 200 gold
from the town and monster.  While that 406 gold could not have otherwise been earned,
chances are you gave up a lot more monster and town gold to paint those paintings.  
You've been warned.

The Artist reward is not balanced against the other jobs in the game, 
and the job exists mostly for multiclassing for the high score board 
and achieving the special "of All Trades" finale.

JACK OF ALL TRADES

If you manage to reach Day 100 with the title "of All Trades" (five jobs with
parenthetical levels of 12, three jobs with parenthetical levels of 13) then 
congratulations, you get pretty much every reward in the book.  You get the 200
gold from the final monster and final town, everything you sacrificed as a Healer
in addition to 1 gold for every point of remaining health, plus 1 gold for every 
level of training, plus the monster gold for all your pets, plus even the payout 
for your paintings as an artist.  And you don't even have to make a roll to get it.

MOM

There is an alternate score, Mom (as in "What does Mom think of you?")

This score consists of your gold divided by all the town and monster (not 
including purchased pets) gold generated for your game, multiplied by 100.  
This score is for those who think it's unfair that the amount of gold it's 
even possible to get per game can vary widely (though the average is about 2300.)
Having the highest "Mom" score for your title will also get you a place on the 
high score board, though you'll still be ranked by your final gold, because 
life is ultimately not fair.

Note that, because the Scholar, Artist and All Trades endings give them access to 
sources of gold beyond town and monster gold, it is theoretically possible for 
them to get a Mom score higher than 100.  Good luck with that.


